OK, so next up is the integer and integer is probably the most common numerical data type used by default
in Java.
So in other words, I think it's safe to say that most Java developers, when they just need a generic
variable to hold numbers and do basic math on, they're probably going to default to using an integer.
I'm not exactly sure why that is, I guess, probably because it's kind of at the sweet spot of, you
know, having probably enough range for the typical situation that a programmer would need and just,
you know, the right amount of flexibility.
OK, so integer is 32 bit, as you can see here.
Here's the integer I don't know little column, if you will, right?
And then with the numbering here we're going up to 32, right?
So that's a 32 bit long data type.
And because it's 32 bits, it can hold a range from roughly negative two point one billion to positive
two point one billion.
OK.
So, you know, pretty good for a whole lot of things.
I mean, like programmers will do things like make basic loops and stuff, and they might want to well,
they'll have to define a variable of some type to count the number of iterations through that loop.
And like I said before, most Java developers, probably by default, are going to use an integer to
do that.
And so as long as you're loop only needs to go up to roughly 2.1 billion or less, you're you're good
with with end.
Now, you know, knowing that it's 32 bits wide and goes up to 2.1 billion, it certainly could be argued
that end may be overkill for a lot of things that developers may want to do with numbers by default.
And that's one of the reasons why it's so important to make sure that you're aware of all of these basic
data types, the byte, short end, and so on.
Because, you know, maybe when you're going to do a loop and you know, you're only going to loop 20
times, possibly why bother with an end to you could conceivably just use a byte for that, you know,
and save a little space in the computer.
Now, on the other hand, like I said before, modern day computers have a minimum usually of four gigs
of RAM.
And so, you know, even using hundreds of INTs isn't likely to put much of a dent in the total amount
of RAM in a computer.
So with respect to programmers from 30, 40, 50 years ago, I think it's safe to say that a lot of
programmers today probably have become quite wasteful, if you will, because we can afford it, right?
Because the computers have so much ram.
You know, you often just don't need to even think a whole lot about, you know, what data type are
you using?
Are you using the most efficient data type?
But, you know, whatever, it may still be good to think about it from time to time.
OK, so anyway, into 32 bits long, let's let's look at the next largest data type, and then we're
going to backtrack a little bit.
Also, because just as short shares a characteristic with another data type, which is care and also
does.
But we'll come back and look at another data type that is also 32 bit wide.
OK, so the next data type after into that I want to look at is long, and it's really long.
It's twice as long or twice as wide, if you will, as int it is 64 bit, as you can see here, if you
can see that because now I've had to zoom out so much that you can barely see the numbers anymore,
but that's 64 bits wide.
OK.
And that gives it a range of a number that I don't even I honestly don't know how to say this number.
Let's see.
So we're at one hundred thousand million billion trillion.
I don't know if this is quadrillion quintillion.
I'm not even sure how to how to say that number in English.
It's a very large number, though.
OK.
Right.
So one place where you may tend to see long used is often times when we're writing programs that need
to store records to a database, and each record that we will store in the database requires its own
ID.
You'll often see programmers use type long for that idea, and they will do that just to ensure that
it's pretty much impossible that you could run out of potential IDs for those records, whereas it only
goes up to positive two point one billion.
I'm sure there really are a number of applications in the world of programming where you could exhaust
that limit that upper limit of two.
Point one billion, let's say, like if you had to account for every single item that went into the
making of a spacecraft or an aircraft or something like every screw, every bolt, every single thing,
I don't know there might be two billion of every little thing that that goes into making, you know,
some aircraft or something.
So for safety's sake, you will tend to see some programmers just default to using a long for things
like that.
Let's also consider like if you were going to write an application that would assign an I.D. to every
living being on planet Earth.
Currently, I think the population is somewhere around seven billion.
So right there you would not be able to use an end to represent every human being on Earth.
Since it, the upper limit is only 2.1 billion and we're already at roughly seven or eight billion right
now.
So then you've got to jump to using a long.
OK.
So and that's like I said earlier, that's really the thinking behind these different data types.
You're going to ask yourself, what is it that I need to count?
What do I think the upper limit will ever be on whatever it is that I need to count in my program?
And then what data type will comfortably fit with that assumed upper limit?
And that's how you can determine what what data type you probably should be using for whatever it is
that you're doing.
However, like I said, a lot of Java developers won't really go through that thought process, and
instead they will just default to using it for pretty much everything.
And for the most part, that's probably pretty safe.
But it may be wasteful in cases where if they had gone through that thought process, they might have
realized, well, there's no chance on Earth that I will ever get into the billions for whatever I'm
about to count in my program, and perhaps a short or a bite would have been more than sufficient.
Now let me be clear on something because I guess I didn't explicitly show it in code.
So if you were to create variables of these various types, you are going to be limited in how large
a number you can put into those variables and to prove that.
Let me let me go back to the ADP and show you maybe a couple of examples with byte and short.
OK, so here we had this bite and I put the number 13 in it and the upper limit of a byte is 127.
So let me first to show, OK, I can put one hundred and twenty seven in there, and that's perfectly
fine.
I don't get any error, but if I try to do one twenty eight, bam, that line now has an error because
I have now exceeded the number of bits that are allocated to a byte for me to assign a value to it.
Right?
OK.
So I'm going to put that back.
Let's see.
Similarly, the upper limit on a short is thirty two thousand seven hundred sixty seven.
Right?
So let me show you that thirty two thousand seven hundred sixty seven.
OK.
It's happy.
But if I go one more over that 768 bam, that blows up also.
Now I'm going to put this back to 767.
Now, if you'll recall, though, I also mentioned, though, that a short is sixteen bits long or wide
and so is a cr right there, both sixteen bits.
However, a short is a signed data type, which means it has a negative and a positive range.
It can represent both negative and positive numbers, so it can represent negative thirty two thousand
seven hundred sixty eight, up to positive thirty two thousand seven hundred sixty seven.
Now, if you wanted to go twice as big as what the short can give you, which would be what, sixty
four sixty five thousand something like that because you didn't need any negative numbers, you only
were going to need positive numbers.
One trick, if you will, that you can do is to simply use a care for these numbers.
Now here you see me using a card to actually assign characters, but I can assign numbers to a card
just as well, because at the at the end of the day, these characters are numbers.
I am in essence, right here storing the number 65 in this variable, really, and I don't know what
the number is for for this.
But so if I make a care variable, let's call it bigger short.
And I'll start off with the same thing just to show you that I can do this right?
OK, so I just put thirty two thousand seven sixty seven in here.
Now remember on the short when I went one over that it blew up on me because that's the upper range.
But, you know, put this back.
But if I come down here and do that?
That's allowed.
And that's because care doubles the range going in the positive direction because there is no negative
there.
So that last bit here, if we go back over here again and look, OK, so if you'll recall, I stated
that in order to allow for negative and positive, what these data types will generally do is they will
take the last bit and they will use that just to indicate whether or not that number is negative or
positive.
Right.
But if you don't need that last bit to indicate the sign of the number, well, now you just effectively
doubled your range.
And so a care is not signed, it is unsigned, meaning all the all the values in it are positive, and
therefore it has a positive range that is twice that of a short.
OK.
So same number of values, but shifted to all positive instead of short having half negative and roughly
half negative and half being positive.
OK, so now I can put bigger numbers in here, like sixty four.
Oops!
64000.
Right.
That fits where that would never fit in a short.